---
title: Jan 2020 website is up
author: Benjamin Nitschke
authorURL: http://twitter.com/BennyNitschke
---

This blog is all about the development of the Strict programming language, which has the main goal allowing computers/AI to understand and write their own code with it. While Strict might look similar to C like languages or python, go, lua or lisp, clojure or scheme because of its basic functional nature, it differentiates from all programming languages I know about by the simple fact that it is 100% TDD (test driven development) and the code being very strict on what you can and can't do, thus often leading to only one correct implementation. At least that is the idea so far.

Earlier versions of strict already existed around 10 years ago (shoutout to Irony Compiler Kit) and ~20 years ago on paper/early concepts and while they worked as a very simple language, they were not useful or productive at all. It is very hard to build an ecosystem around a language, so the new strategy for this year is to make use of the Strict language early at work (generating c++, cleanup c#, connect libraries, useful stuff). Also the goal is to create a language that can be written by computers, not to build frameworks, libraries or support general user usecases. As long as it is possible we will try to utilize existing languages, libraries and frameworks by simply calling them, not reinvent them. The Strict backend can generate C++, C# and Java code anyway, so this part should be easy as long as there is no close integration needed (like database or UI code, let's not do that right now).

Today was about setting up this website: After trying out https://jekyllrb.com/ and many themes and plugins after checking out the even more complex https://gohugo.io/ it turns out these are not good fits for the Strict language, which should be easy to install and work immediately. https://docusaurus.io/en/ is a project that is installed with one line and works instantly after downloading all the dependencies automatically, on any platform that supports node.

Well, not much on here yet, we will add documentation over time and get more speed on the road in 2020.

My previous blog (2004-2016): https://BenjaminNitschke.com