---
title: September 2022 For loops
author: Luka Minjoraia
---

`For` loops exist in almost all programming languages (except functional ones) as it serves incredibly useful and convinient practicality for certain problems encountered in day-to-day programming. 

Strict works with various forms of `for` loops and they are very simple to write. The `expression` in the `for` loop basically is an iterator which iterates through the series of values.
Let's look at a very simple example of the `for` loop:
```
for number in numbers
	log.Write(number)
```
Above is given a very simple example that is pretty straightforward : it iterates through the list of numbers and logs each of the number. `numbers` is an *iterable* and `number` is an explicit *iterator* variable.

## How implicit variables work

We can rewrite previous example in a more convinient, `"Strict"` way. `for` loops in Strict has two variables by default - `index` & `value`. The aformentioned variables are implicit, meaning they don't need to be declared as they always exist within the scope of the loop. 

Let's rewrite the previous example using the implicit `value` variable:

```
for numbers
	log.Write(value)
```
This code does exactly the same thing as above. Note that `value` is basically a pointer to the instance of the current class (like `this` in C/C++/C#), but as soon as the scope of the loop is entered, it becomes the *iterator* variable.

`index` works similarly, but obviously it holds the index of the element.

```
for ("Hello", "World", "!")
	log.Write(index)
```
This would log 0, 1 and 2.

Let's check out this function, which is a part of Range.strict and just sums the value from start of the range to the endo of the range:

```
Sum
	Range(2, 4).Sum is 2 + 3 + 4
	Range(42, 45).Sum is 42 + 43 + 44
	let result = Mutable(0)
	for item in Range(value.Start, value.End)
		result = result + item
	result
```

We declare a mutable variable, which is supposed to hold the result of the summation, then we iterate through the Range, perform the sum of the item and return the result. Now this can be rewritten in a much easier way by utilizing the features of Strict.

```
Sum
	Range(2, 4).Sum is 2 + 3 + 4
	Range(42, 45).Sum is 42 + 43 + 44
	for value
		+ value
```

This does exactly the same as above, the `return` statement AND the summation is simply inlined in the for scope producing the result.


## Nested loops

In Strict, you can take full adventage of nested loops, and they're pretty straightforward.

```
let weeks = 3
let days = 7
for weeks
    log.Write("Week: " + index + 1);
    for days
    	log.Write("Day: " + index + 1)
```
